                 Ultima VI : The False Prophet Quick Reference Guide
                              by Lord British
                                 R Y G A R

   Getting Started - Floppy Drive Systems
     1. Use the DOS diskcopy commands to make duplicates of the Ultima VI
  disks in this box. you can't play using the original disks!
     For example, if your floppy drive is dirve A, insert the first disk &
  type <diskcopy a: a:>. Repeat this procedure until you have a copy of
  each Ultima VI disk.
     2. Put the original disks someplace safe so you can use them if any of
  your copies go bad.
     3. Format a blank disk and label it "PLAYER DISK".
     4. Insert your copy of the ENDGAME disk (disk 7) and type INSTALL.
  Then follow the directions on the screen to configure the game for you
  computer's graphics capabilities, soundboards, etc.
     5. Once you've done this, you can insert your copy of the PROGRAM disk
  (disk 2) in your floppy drive and type ULTIMA6 to watch the boot-up
  sequence and play the game.
     NOTE:Ultima VI comes on low density, 360K disks. If you have a higher
  capacity drive, you can copy more than one of the originals onto each
  of your disks. This will allow you to play the game without switching
  disks as often. However, be sure to keep all of the files on a given
  original disk together when you make your copies.

  Getting started - Hard Drive Systems
     1. Make sure you have at least four (4) megabytes free on your drive.
     2. Insert the original copy of the ENDGAME disk in your floppy drive.
     3. Type the drive letter of your floppy drive and press <Enter>.
     4. Type COPYU6 <source drive>: <destination drive>:<Enter>. For
  example, if your floppy drive is drive A, and your hard drive is drive
  C, type COPYU6 a: c:<enter>.
     5. Follow the directions on the screen to tailor the game to your
  system. This will also create a subdirectory called \Ultima6 on your
  hard drive and copy the original disks to that subdirectory.
     6. At the DOS prompt, type Ultima6<enter> to watch the boot-up
     sequence and play the game. The next time you want to play, enter the
     Ultima6 subdirectory by typing cd\ultima6<enter>. Then type
     Ultima6<Enter> to get started.

  Booting the Game
     1. turn on your computer and boot DOS. if you want to use a mouse,
  make sure a Microsoft compatible mouse driver is installed.
     2. Log the drive you will play from. Type the <drive letter>: and
  press <enter>.
     3. If using a hard drive, type cd\ultima6 & press <enter> to enter the
  game directory.
     4. Type Ultima6 to play.  (this is very difficult, eh? -DC)

  The Main Menu
     When you type "ultima6," an introductory sequence will begin. Read all
  text messages that appear and press any key or click in the message
  box to move on to the next message or screen. (press <escape> if you want
  to bypass this sequence altogether).
     When this is over, the main menu will appear, listing 5 options -
  Introduction, Create a character, Transfer a character, Acknowledgements,
  and Journey Onward. To select one of these options click on it with the
  mouse. From the keyboard, use the arrow keys, or numeric keypad to
  higlight the one you want, then press return, or type the forst letter of
  the options name.
     The first time you play, you will want to go directly to Create a
  Character. Here, you can type in your character's name, and select his or
  her sex and portrait. Go on to the next portion of the character creation
  system by clicking the continue box (or by typing "C"). This will take
  you to a series of questions. Answer by selecting A or B response to each
  question. The way in which you answer determines the kind of character
  you get.
     When your character is complete, you will automatically be take to the
  Introduction. This will tell you what the game is about. If you want to
  watch this again later, select Introduction from the menu.
     If you played Ultima IV or V, you may want to bring your character
  from one of those games over to Ultima VI. Transfer a character allows
  you to do that. Select this option and follow the directions on the
  screen, then click the Transfer button and you're ready to use your old
  character in the new game.
     Acknowledgements tell you who did what in Ultima VI.
     Journey Onward takes you directly to the Ultima VI game. Select this
  option when you're ready to play.

  Screen Layout
     The game screen is divided into 4 regions - the Map, the Status
  Display, the Message Scroll, and the Command Icons.

        +-----------------------------------------+
        |                       | Sun & Moons     |
        |     MAP               |-----------------|
        |                       |Status Display   |
        |                       |                 |
        |                       |               <---- Hit Points
        |                       |                 |
        |                       |-----------------|
        |                       |Message          |
        |                       |        Scroll   |
        |                       |                 |
        |-----------------------|                 |
        | Command Icons         |                 |
        | [A[C[T[L[G[D[M[U[R[B] |                 |
        +-----------------------------------------+
  The Map
     The largest region, in the upper left is the map (wow). This shows the
  world you are moving thru. With the view centered on you (or another
  member of your party if its their turn).
     With a mouse, move your characters around by positioning the pointer
  over the map until it becomes an arrow pointing in the direction you wish
  to move. Then click the left button. Some actions ask you for a target
  location. (you may have to say where you want to drop an item, for
  example). To select a location, click on it with the left mouse button.
     If you don't want to use a mouse, move by pressing one of the arrow
  keys, or one of the 8 keys around the 5 on the numeric keypad. These keys
  are also used to select target locations - move the crosshairs on the
  screen to the desired location and press <enter> to initiate the action.
     You can pass your turn & do nothing by positiong the mouse pointer
  over your character and clicking the left mouse button or by pressing the
  space bar.

  The Status Display
     In the upper right-hand corener of the screen is the status display.
  At the top of the display, the current position of Britannia's sub &
  the positions and phases of the 2 moons in the sky are shown.
     Beneath this is a roster of all the members of your party, along with
  each character's figure and current hit points. A character whose hit
  points are printed in red is hurt; one whose hit points are green is
  poisoned.
     When a party has more than 5 characters, arrows will appear at the top
  & bottom of this screen. Click on these arrows to scroll up and down thru
  the list of party members. The + and - keys can also be used.
     If you click on a characters name, you will be shown thier portrait &
  stats. The higher a stat, the better. STRENGTH determines how much a
  character can carry, and how effectively he can strike with bludgeoning
  weapons. DEXTERITY determines how quick they are (faster characters get
  to move and/or strike more often), and how effective they are with
  non-bludgeoning weapons as well as crossbows, bows & other missile
  weapons. INTELLIGENCE determines the characters bargaining ability and
  effectiveness as a spellcaster.
     The next 2 stats show pairs of numbers - the current number of points
  the character has, and the max possible. Magic POints determine how many
  spells can be cast. For instance, a spell of the 4th Circle uses 4 magic
  points (NO WAY DUDE! heh -DC). Health determines how much damage the
  character can take without being killed. Each hour you recover a number
  of magic points equal to your current level. Health can only be regained
  by rest or healing.
     The next statistic in the list is Level, which indicates how powerful
  a character has become thru experience gained in past adventures. The
  last stat, Experience, determines when a player is ready to progress
  to the next level by meditating at a shrine.
     To view a character's Inventory, click ooon one of the figures to
  the left of the roster.
                  +--------------------------------+
                  |                                |
                  |  Readied                       |
1:show prev. char |      Items          Inventory  |
2:return to party |                                |
  display         |                                |
3:switch between  |                                |
  portrait &      |                                |
  inventory       | 1 2 3 4 5           Combat Mode|
4:show next char  |                                |
5:change combat   +--------------------------------+
  mode

     On the left side of the inventory display is a figure showing all
  equipment that is readied for immediate use - either held in the
  charcter's hands or being worn. If you are holdingg something that
  requires both hands, such as a crossbow, you will not be allowed to
  put anything in the other hand. Below this figure is the current
  weight of all readied items, and the max weight the character can have
  readied.
     On the right side of the inventory display are all the other items
  carried by the character. The total weight being carried is listed
  here, along with the mex weight the character can have in inventory.
  To ready or unready an item, just click on it with the left mouse
  button. To look inside a container in youor inventory, such as a abad
  or a chest, just click on it. Click oon it again to return to the main
  inventory display.
     At the lower right, the character's current combat mode is
  displayed (see "begin/break off combat" below).
     At the lower left of the status display are 5 buttons. From left to
  right, the functions are:Show previous character, Return to party
  display, Switch between portrait and inventory displays, Show next
  character, and Change combat mode.
     To use the inventory display from the keyboard, press the <tab> key
  to move the crosshairs to the status display. You can then move to any
  itmem or button witht the arrow or numeric keypas keys, and press
  <enter> to select it. Pressing the <tab> key again will return the
  crosshairs to the map. The function keys F1 thru F8 will switch the
  display to show the different members of your party. (If you dono't
  know the position of a character in yoour roster, the + and - keys
  allow you to show the next and previous characters.) F10 will return
  to the main party display. The * key will toggle between a character's
  portrait and inventory displays.

  The Message Scroll
     At the lower right of the screen is the message scroll. All text
  describing things you see & hear, as well as the results of your
  actions, is displayed here. When a message is too long to fit on the
  scroll, a flashing, downward pointing arrow appears at the bottom of
  the scroll. Press the space bar or click in the message scroll to view
  the rest of the message.

  The Command Icons
     Underneath the map are 10 command buttons. The main commands in
  Ultima VI can be selected either with the mouse or the keyboard. Tp
  use a command from the keyboard, simply press the 1st letter of its
  name. With the mouse, move the pointer to the command button you want
  to use and click the left mouse button. Then select the object or
  person you want to use the command on.
     For frequently used commands, such as Get, look, Attack, or Move,
  you can set up a default command for use with the Right mouse button.
  Click the right button on a command, and a blue line will appear under
  it.. From then on, clicking the right button on any shape on the map
  or in your inventory display will execute that command at any time.
  For all functions other than executing the default command, the left
  mouse button shoould be used. The 10 main commands are:
     ATTACK(A) is used to fight monsters, animals, or people, or to
  attempt to destroy objects. After choosing the Attack command, choose
  a target on the map that is in range of the weapon you have readied.
     CAST(C) allows you to cast magic spells. You must have a spellbook
  readied, and have enough magic points & reagents available to cast he
  desired spell. When a character tries to Cast a spell, the spellbook
  will be shoown in the status display, listing the names of all the
  spells they have learned. Each name is followed by the number of times
  that spell can be cast with the reagents in inventory. To page thru
  the spells, click on the blue arrow buttons below the list or use the
  left & right arrow keys on the keyboard.
     You cast a spell by cicking on its name, or by selecting it with
  the up & down arrows and pressing<enter>. Typing the first letter of
  each syllable of the spell also works. For instance, to cast the Repel
  Undead spell - An Xen Corp - you could type AXC and press <enter>.
  Some spells require you to specify whom or what you are casting them
  oon. Simply select a target from the map or in your inventory.
     There is one special spell, the Help spell, which requires no
  reagents. This will return you instantly to Lord British's Castle.. It
  should only be used in the most desperate of situations, however, as
  it will usually cost your party many experience points.
     TALK(T) lets you converse with the people you encounter in the
  game. You can also speak with some shrines & statues, and with the
  other members of your party. You must select the character on the map
  you wish to speak with. Their portrait will appear in the status
  display while they are speaking.
     You talk by typing single words on the keyboard and pressing
  <enter>. All words may be abbreviated to the first 4 letters (e.g.,
  "Elephant" may be abbreviated to "elep").
     Most people will respond to the words "name", "job", and "bye."
  (The "bye" command ends a conversation. You can accomplish the same
  thing by pressing <enter> without typing anything.) Some people will
  also respond to the words "join" and "leave," allowing you to add
  members to your party (up to a max of 8) or remove them.
     During the course of conversation, people give you an idea of what
  they're interested in talking about. If you have the help function on,
  as it is when yyou start the game, the subjects they want to talk
  about will appear in a different color on the screen; if help is off,
  you'll have to figure oout the key words in their conversations.
  However, be aware that some people will respond to other subjects, if
  you ask them.
     LOOK(L) allows you to identify anyone or anything in the location
  you select, on the map or in your inventory. This command can be used
  to read books, signs, and gravestones, or to examine paintings. It
  will also give info onn the effectiveness of weapons and armor. When
  you use the Look command on an object you are adjacent to, you will
  search it. This will reveal the contents of chests, bags, crates,
  barrels, etc.. It will also let you find hidden items or secret doors.
     GET(G) lets you pick up an object on the map. You must be standing
  next to it. If it isn't too heavy, it will be put into your inventory.
     DROP(D) can be used to lighten your load by getting rid of items
  you no longer need. First select the item in your inventory, then
  choose a spot on the map to place it.
     MOVE(M) is used to push an item or to move it between characters in
  the party. If you select an itm on the map, you can sometimes push it
  to an adjacent square to get it out of your way. If it's something
  alive tho, it may not always let youo! Moving an item into a square
  with a chest, barrel, or crate will place the item inside it.
     This command can also be used to move things in & out of containers
  or from one character to another, click on them on the map. When you
  buy a new spell, you must move it into your spellbook before  you can
  cast it.
     USE(U) operates any object that has some function. Among other
  things, it will let you open and close doors & chests, enter or exit
  ships, climb ladders, milk cows, mount horses, light or extinguish
  fires, look into telescopes or crystal balls, ring bells, eat or drink
  food & beverages, or play musical instruments. After using a musical
  instrument, you play it with the numbers 0 thru 9, and press <enter>
  when finished.
     REST(R) lets your party setup a camp and recover health & magic
  points. You will be asked how many hours you wish to rest, from 1 to
  9, and who will stand guard. Select a character on the map display, or
  press <escape> to have no guard. A character will not regain hit
  points if they are out of food, or if they stand guard. If you are
  ambushed while resting, however, your party will not be awakened
  unless you have someone on gueard! You can only rest on land. At sea,
  this command repairs your frigate. Multiple "rests" may be required to
  repair a ship completely.
     BEGIN/BREAK OFF COMBAT(B) switches back and forth between party
  mode and combat mode. In party mode, the members of your part
  automatically follow you around. In combat, each character will behave
  according to the combat mode you have selected for them on their
  inventory display. Characters in Front, Rear or Flank modes will
  position themselves in a formation centered around you. Characters in
  Assault mode will attack the nearest enemy, while those in Retreat
  mode will avoid combat. Characters in Berserk mode will charge and
  attack the strongest foe. Lastly, if you select Command mode for a
  character, you can control their actions each turn, just as you do for
  your own character. You can change a character's combat mode at any
  time, even in the middle of a battle.

  Keyboard Commands
     o  Control-S saves the game. You will be asked if you really want
        to save the game. Type "Y"es to save or "N"o to cancel the command
        and keep playing.
     o  Control-R restores the game to the last saved position. As in
        the case of the Save command, you will be asked to reply "Y" or
        "N".
     o  Control-Q restore the game to the last saved position.  As in
        the case of the Save command, you will be asked to reply "Y" or
        "N"
     o  Control-H toggles help mode on/off
     o  Control-Z toggles sound and music on/off
     o  1 thru 8 place a member of the pary in solo mode. In this mode,
        you can move that character around and perform whatever actions
        you wish, while the rest of the party remains motionless. Note
        that you can't talk to people or use ladders, dungeon entrances,
        or moongates in solo mode - you must be in party mode.
     o  0 (zero) exits solo mode and returns to party mode.
     o  Escape aborts mode functions.

  Spell list
     All known spells of the 8 Circles of Magic are listed below. The
  1st column gives each spell's English language name/effect. The second
  column lists the magical syllables that form the spell's incantation.
  (Remember, you can cast a spell by typing the 1st letter of each
  syllable.) The last column tells you which reagents are necessary to
  cast the spell. These are abbreviated as follows:
                As : Sulfurous Ash   ³   Mo : Blood Moss
                Ga : Garlic          ³   Ni : Nightshade
                Gi : Ginseng         ³   Pe : Black Pearl
                Ma : Mandrake Root   ³   Si : Spider's Silk

  1st Circle Spells
  Create Food  : In Many Ylem  Ga,Gi,Ma
  Detect Magic : Wis Ort       Ni,As
  Detect Trap  : Wis Jux       Ni,As
  Dispel Magic : An Jux Ort    Ga,Gi
  Douse        : An Flam       Ga,Pe
  Harm         : An Mani       Ni,Si
  Heal         : In Mani       Gi,Si
  Help         : Kal Lor       <none>
  Ignite       : In Flam       As,Pe
  Light        : In Lor        As

  The Second Circle                     
  Infravision  : Quas Lor      Ni,As
  Magic Arrow  : Ort Jux       As,Pe
  Poison       : In Nox Por    Ni,Mo,Pe
  Reappear     : In Ylem       Su,Mo,Pe 
  Sleep        : In Zu         Ni,Si,Pe
  Telekinesis  : Ort Por Ylem  Mo,Ma,Pe
  Trap         : In Jux        Si,Ni
  Unlock Magic : Ex Por        As,Mo
  Vanish       : An Ylem       Ga,Mo,Pe

  The Third Circle
  Curse        : An Sanct       As,Ni,Ga
  Dispel Field : An Grav        As,Pe
  Fireball     : Por Flam       Pe,As
  Great Light  : Vas Lor        As,Ma
  Magic Lock   : An Por         As,Mo,Ga
  Mass Awaken  : An Vas Zu      Gi,Ga
  Mass Sleep   : Vas Zu         Gi,Ni,Si
  Peer         : In Sanct       As,Gi,Ga
  Repel Undead : An Xen Corp    Ga,As

  The Fourth Circle
  Animate      : Ort Ylem        As,Ma,Mo
  Conjure      : Kal Xen         Si,Ma
  Disable      : An Vas Mani     Ni,Si,Ma
  Fire Field   : In Flam Grav    Pe,As,Si
  Great Heal   : Vas Mani        Gi,Si,Ma
  Locate       : In Wis          Ni
  Mass Dispel  : Vas An Jux Art  Ga,Gi,Ni
  Poison Field : In Nox Grav     Ni,Si,Pe
  Sleep Field  : In Zu Grav      Gi,Si,Pe
  Wind Change  : Rel Hur         As,Mo

  The 5th Circl
  Energy Field : In Sanct Grav   Ma,Si,Pe
  Explosion    : Vas Por Flam    Ma As,Pe,Mo
  Insect Swarm : Kal Bet Xen     Mo,Si,As
  Invisibility : Sanct Lor       Ni,Mo
  Lightning    : Ort Grav        Pe,Ma,As
  Paralyze     : An Xen Por      Si,As,Ni,Pe
  Pickpocket   : Por Ylem        Mo,Si,Ni
  Reveal       : An Sanct Lor    Si,Ni,Ma
  Seance       : Kal Mani Corp   Mo,Ma,Ni,Si,As
  X-Ray        : Wis Ylem        Ma,As

  The Sixth Circle
  Charm        : An Xen Ex      Pe,Ni,Si
  Clone        : In Quas Xen    As,Si,Mo,Gi,Ni,Ma
  Confuse      : Vas Quas       Ma,Ni
  Flame Wind   : Flam Hur       As,Mo,Ma
  Hail Storm   : Kal Des Ylem   Mo,Pe,Ma
  Mass Protect : Vas In Sanct   As,Gi,Ga,Ma
  Poison Wind  : Nox Hur        Ni,As,Mo
  Replicate    : In Quas Ylem   As,Si,Mo,Gi,Ni
  Web          : In Des Por     Si

  The Seventh Circle
  Chain Bolt   : Vas Ort Grav  Pe,Ma,As,Mo
  Enchant      : In Ort Ylem   Si,Ma,As
  Energy Wind  : Grav Hur      Ma,Ni,As,Mo
  Fear         : Quas Corp     Ni,Ma,Ga
  Gate Travel  : Vas Rel Por   As,Pe,Ma
  Kill         : In Corp       Pe,Ni,As
  Mass Curse   : Vas An Sanct  As,Ni,Ga,Ma
  Mass Invis.  : Vas Sanct Lor Ma,Ni,Mo,Pe
  Wing Strike  : Kal Ort Xen   Mo,Si,Ma,As
  Wizard Eye   : Por Ort Wis   Mo,Ni,Ma,As,Pe,Si

  The Eighth Circle
  Death Wind   : Corp Hur      Ma,Ni,As,Mo
  Eclipse      : Vas An Lor    Ma,As,Ni,Ga,Mo
  Mass Charm   : Vas An Xen Ex Pe,Ni,Si,Ma
  Mass Kill    : Vas Corp      Pe,Ni,Ma,As
  Resurrect    : In Mani Corp  Ga,Gi,Si,As,Mo,Ma
  Slime        : Vas Rel Xen   Mo,Ni,Ma
  Summon       : Kal Xen Corp  Ma,Ga,Mo,Si
  Time Stop    : An Tym        Ma,Ga,Mo
  Tremor       : Vas Por Ylem  Mo,As,Ma

